---
title: 'Blog Post number 5'
date: 2012-08-14
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-5/
tags:
  - owasp
  - cybersecurity
  - ethicalhacking
---

This is a sample 5 blog post. Lorem ipsum I can't remember the rest of lorem ipsum and don't have an internet connection right now. Testing testing testing this blog post. Blog posts are cool.

Reflecting on OWASP Top 10 Vulnerabilities
======

In this article, I will be reflecting on the top 10 vulnerabilities of 2021, as identified by OWASP, a respected community dedicated to researching and highlighting prevalent cybersecurity vulnerabilities within a specific timeframe. Simply put, OWASP serves as a massive billboard, showcasing the most widespread vulnerabilities that have emerged within a given timeframe. Consider it as a spotlight that highlights the common weak spots that can put cybersecurity at risk.

I know I am writing an article on a topic which already has thousands of articles available on the internet. However, I finally had the opportunity to revise the OWASP Top 10 and thought it would be beneficial to write an article about it. This presents a win-win situation: I can refresh my knowledge, and you can gain a simplified explanation of these vulnerabilities.

Just a quick reminder, this article won’t dive into the technical details of exploiting vulnerabilities. There are mainly two reasons for this. Firstly, this article will only provide surface information about all vulnerabilities so that you can get a level of understanding regarding all vulnerabilities and be better prepared to comprehend a more technical article that I’ll be writing later. Secondly, I do not think I am expert at simplifying the depth of vulnerabilities right now.

Okay another reminder too, I just completed this article and realized that it got too long and you might get bored, if you start feeling a bit bored, feel free to take a break whenever you need one.

If you find any errors or have suggestions to improve this article, I would be more than happy to get the notifications of your messages on my LinkedIn. It might be just a message or feedback for you, but for me it would add so much value, I will be expecting your feedback or any kind of messages.

To begin, authentication is the process of confirming the identity of a user who wants to access a system. It involves using different methods to verify their identity, such as providing a username and password or session IDs. Broken authentication refers to situations where attackers take advantage of vulnerabilities within the authentication process to impersonate genuine users.

Broken authentication is not specific, it comes in different faces, some faces of Broken Authentication are very popular in cybersecurity field and all of them are vast within themselves. Few common examples are,

Insecure Direct Object References (IDOR) happen when an application mistakenly exposes internal or sensitive information, like database records or files, to users without properly checking if they are authorized. This means that attackers can manipulate certain parts of the application, like parameters or URLs, to access other users’ data or confidential information that they shouldn’t have access to.

Privilege Escalation occurs when the access controls in a system are not strong enough, allowing attackers to increase their level of privileges. For example, a user who initially has limited access might find a way to change their account settings or modify certain authorization settings, which then gives them more powerful administrative access.

Vertical and Horizontal Access Control Issues refer to situations where users gain access to resources or functions that they shouldn’t have. Vertical issues happen when a regular user gains access to functions that are meant only for administrators or higher-level roles. Horizontal issues occur when a user, who is at the same privilege level as another user, gains unauthorized access to that user’s resources or data.

Missing Function-Level Access Control happens when an application doesn’t properly check if an authenticated user has the right permissions to perform certain actions. This allows attackers to exploit this weakness and perform actions that they are not supposed to. For example, a user without administrative rights might be able to access or modify administrative features or functions.

Inadequate Session Management refers to the improper handling of user sessions within an application. This can include using weak session tokens or easily predictable session IDs. Attackers can take advantage of these vulnerabilities to hijack user sessions and pretend to be other users, gaining unauthorized access to their accounts and the information associated with them.

CRYPTOGRAPHIC FAILURES

As per OWASP, cryptographic failure is a symptom instead of a cause. Any failure responsible for the exposure of sensitive and critical data to an unauthorized entity can be considered a cryptographic failure.

First of all, cryptography is a mathematical technique which scrambles data/information in such a way that, no one without secret key can access it. Cryptographic failures refer to vulnerabilities or weaknesses in the implementation or usage of cryptographic algorithms, protocols, or systems that compromise the security provided by cryptography.

Cryptographic failures can happen for several reasons, including:

Weak techniques: Making use of old or attackable encryption techniques. Using outdated encryption techniques like DES as opposed to more powerful ones like AES, for instance.

Insecure Key Management: Poor handling of cryptographic keys, including the use of weak or simple-to-guess keys, incorrect key storage, or failing to replace keys on a regular basis. Insecure key management can make encrypted data accessible to other parties.

Insufficient Entropy: When producing random numbers or cryptographic keys, there is not enough randomness or unpredictability. Because attackers can use biases or patterns in the generated values to decrypt data, this can reduce the overall security of cryptographic systems.

Incorrect Configuration: Misconfiguring cryptographic systems or protocols, which may result in vulnerabilities. The two examples of Incorrect Configuration can be the use of outdated SSL or TLS security methods or shoddy encryption settings.

Implementation flaws: Mistakes made when putting cryptographic algorithms or protocols into use, which can lead to vulnerabilities that attackers can take advantage of. These weaknesses can include improper use of cryptographic operations or susceptibility to intrusions that depend on timing or side-channel data.

Key Exchange Vulnerabilities: Poor key exchange practices, such as utilizing flimsy parameters or failing to adequately authenticate the parties. Unauthorized access or the ability for attackers to eavesdrop and alter communications are both possible outcomes of these vulnerabilities.

INJECTION

Security vulnerabilities known as “injection vulnerabilities” allow malicious attackers to inject unwanted code or instructions into a system or application. Attackers can exploit these vulnerabilities to steal sensitive information, leak data, compromise system integrity, or perform denial-of-service attacks to compromise systems. Identifying and fixing injection vulnerabilities as soon as possible is critical to maintaining the confidentiality and integrity of compromised systems.

There are several types of injection vulnerabilities, including SQL injection, command injection, and cross-site scripting (XSS).

With SQL injection, an attacker injects malicious SQL code to manipulate the web application’s database queries. The vulnerability occurs when user input is not sufficiently validated, allowing an attacker to manipulate query behavior. This makes it possible to circumvent authentication, extract data, modify or delete records, or gain unauthorized control over the entire database.

Similarly, Cross-site scripting (XSS) occurs when a hacker inserts harmful code into a website or online application. This code is then unknowingly executed by the user’s web browser when they visit the compromised site. As a result, the attacker can steal sensitive data, manipulate website content, perform actions on behalf of the user, and distribute malware. The types of XSS include Stored XSS, Reflective XSS and DOM-based XSS.

Another form of this vulnerability is command injection. In command injection, an attacker uses insufficient input validation to trick a system into executing unauthorized instructions. This allows hackers to hijack systems, access personal information, or perform malicious actions. Before using user input as a command, it is important to thoroughly validate and check it to protect system security and prevent command injection.

INSECURE DESIGN

Now, let’s talk about insecure vulnerabilities. When developers get caught up in making a website look good, they sometimes forget to prioritize security. They may come up with various designs, but each new design can bring new vulnerabilities. It’s important to find a balance between design and security. Ignoring security during the design phase can leave websites and applications open to attacks that could compromise user data. By being aware of potential risks and taking steps to implement proper security measures, developers can make their designs safer for users.

Imagine we have a website with an incredibly attractive and visually appealing login page. The developers invested a significant amount of time and effort into creating a visually stunning interface. However, amidst their dedication to aesthetics, they unintentionally overlooked critical security measures such as input validation and protection against brute force attacks. As a result, the website’s security is comparable to a magnificent mansion with wide-open doors and windows, leaving it vulnerable to potential intrusions.

In this scenario, the developers’ primary focus on creating an aesthetically pleasing login page led them to neglect crucial security considerations. Without proper input validation, malicious actors can exploit vulnerabilities by injecting harmful code or data. Additionally, the absence of protection against brute force attacks means that attackers could repeatedly attempt to guess passwords without encountering any obstacles.

It is crucial to strike a balance between design aesthetics and security measures to ensure the protection of user data and prevent unauthorized access. By implementing mechanisms to validate user input and fortify the website against brute force attacks, developers can create an environment that combines both visual appeal and robust security.

SECURITY MISCONFIGURATION

As the name suggests, security misconfiguration happens when security options are not configured in such a way that it does not increase security. Security misconfiguration is a prevalent factor that can occur in any computing system, software application, and even in cloud and network infrastructure. It is a well-known cause of cyber-attacks and can lead to the successful compromise of sensitive data.

In the current development scenario, Frameworks have simplified the process of programming, making it more efficient and less time-consuming to develop applications. Nevertheless, these frameworks can pose a security risk due to their intricate configurations, which may lead to security misconfigurations. Similarly, the prevalent use of open-source code brings the possibility of default configurations that undermine security and render the application vulnerable.

There are multiple types of Security Configuration, which are:

Unpatched or outdated system: The intruders primary focus always becomes the bugs that have not been patched after any vulnerability is discovered.

Default configuration: Using default configurations without modifying or securing them, which often have well-known usernames, passwords, or settings that attackers can easily exploit.

Unencrypted files: Unencrypted or poorly encrypted files can be easily accessed by intruders compromising the system.

Unsecured devices: Employing compromised devices or credentials, as well as reusing passwords across multiple systems, can undermine the security of your environment, leaving it vulnerable to exploitation. If attackers gain unauthorized access to one system, they could potentially compromise the entire network.

Unused or unnecessary features: Adding useless features adds no value rather than increases the playground for hackers.

Inadequate logging and monitoring: Not having enough logs and monitoring in place can make it hard to find and respond to security issues effectively.

VULNERABLE AND OUTDATED COMPONENTS

Vulnerabilities can arise when code utilizes outdated or inadequately updated software or libraries. No software or libraries are entirely immune to vulnerabilities, as new ones are frequently discovered. This is why devices often send update notifications, prompting users to install the latest versions. Failing to update software or libraries increases the risk of system failures and compromises security.

Regularly updating software and libraries is crucial for mitigating the risks associated with vulnerable and outdated components. By staying current with updates, organizations can minimize the likelihood of exploitation and enhance the overall security and stability of their systems. Update notifications serve as reminders to install the latest versions, which often include crucial security fixes and improvements.

Using outdated software or libraries elevates the risk of system failures and exposes systems and applications to potential compromises. Attackers frequently target known vulnerabilities in outdated components to exploit weaknesses and gain unauthorized access or cause harm.

Therefore, prioritizing software updates and ensuring that all components, including software and libraries, are regularly updated is essential to minimizing the potential risks associated with vulnerabilities.

IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION FAILURE

Identification and authentication failures are vulnerabilities related to applications’ authentication schemes. These vulnerabilities can lead to unauthorized access to sensitive data or functionality. The OWASP Top 10 for 2021 identifies identification and authentication failures as one of the most critical web application security risks.

Identification and authentication involve validating a user’s claimed identity and their permission to access requested resources. Authentication failures occur when an application does not properly validate user credentials, such as passwords, one-time pins, authenticator apps, or biometrics. Authentication failures can also occur when an application does not adequately protect user credentials, such as storing passwords in plaintext or using weak encryption algorithms.

Failures in identification occur when a program incorrectly identifies a user or the role that user has been given. This can happen if the program doesn’t correctly enforce access controls or check session tokens. Identification problems can also result from inadequate user input validation, such as input sanitization and input length checks.

It is suggested to utilize various verification techniques, take anti-automation precautions, and manage sessions effectively to prevent identity and authentication problems. Furthermore, it’s crucial to verify user input, implement powerful encryption methods, and protect user credentials.

SOFTWARE AND DATA INTEGRITY FAILURES

Software and data integrity failures encompass instances where the software and data utilized by a system or application fail to uphold the accuracy, completeness, or consistency of the processed or stored information. These failures can arise from various factors, including hardware issues, software defects, human errors, or malicious attacks.

Software Integrity Failures:

Errors in the code constitute a common cause of software integrity failures. These errors can manifest as unexpected behavior, crashes, or security flaws that malicious actors can exploit. Exploiting such vulnerabilities can lead to data breaches, unauthorized access, or the manipulation of sensitive information. Promptly addressing these software integrity issues through comprehensive testing, code review, and security audits is crucial for organizations.

Data Integrity Failures:

Data integrity failures occur when data becomes lost or corrupted due to hardware malfunctions, software defects, or human errors. Such failures can render the data inaccurate, incomplete, or unusable. Organizations that heavily rely on data for critical operations or decision-making must implement safeguards to protect data integrity. These measures encompass robust backup and recovery mechanisms, data validation procedures, and effective access controls.

Mitigating Software and Data Integrity Failures:

Organizations can adopt several safeguards to prevent software and data integrity failures:

Regular Software Updates: Keeping software up to date is essential as it addresses known vulnerabilities and security flaws. Regular patching and updates are crucial to maintaining the integrity of software systems.

Reliable Backup and Recovery: Implementing dependable backup and recovery mechanisms ensures that data can be restored in the event of integrity failures. Regularly backing up critical data and verifying the integrity of backups are essential practices.

Effective Access Controls: Implementing appropriate access controls guarantees that only authorized individuals can access and modify data and software components. Role-based access control and robust authentication mechanisms help mitigate the risk of unauthorized changes.

System Monitoring: Utilizing system activity monitoring tools aids in detecting signs of illegal access, unusual behavior, or security breaches. Timely detection and response to potential threats can prevent integrity failures.

Incident Response and Disaster Recovery Plans: Establishing well-defined incident response plans and disaster recovery procedures is crucial. These plans outline the steps to be taken in the event of software or data integrity failures, ensuring a swift and effective response to mitigate the impact.

Software and data integrity failures pose substantial risks to organizations, encompassing the potential for data loss, security breaches, and operational disruptions. By comprehending the causes and implementing appropriate safeguards, organizations can protect themselves against these failures. Prioritizing measures such as regular software updates, robust backup mechanisms, access controls, system monitoring, and well-defined incident response plans is crucial for maintaining software and data integrity. By adopting these measures, organizations can safeguard their critical assets and ensure the reliability and security of their systems and data.

SECURITY LOGGING AND MONITORING FAILURE

While security logging and monitoring failures may not possess inherent vulnerabilities that can be directly exploited, it is crucial to acknowledge the significant value and necessity of implementing effective logging and monitoring practices.

Security Vulnerability occurs when a system fails to properly log and monitor the events in the system. Some common logging and monitoring failures that organizations may encounter include:

Insufficient logging: Failure to have sufficient logging including all the necessary events can make it difficult to detect and investigate security incidents.

Inadequate logs that lack useful information: The system should ensure that only important logs like fatal and error logs should be backed up rather than debug and only informational logs are backed up.

Absence of real-time monitoring systems: Implementing a centralized monitoring system or SIEM (Security Information Event Management) adds an additional layer of security and aids in the prevention of attacks. With a pre-defined set of rules, it can promptly notify the Security Operations Center (SOC) or administrator, enhancing protection. Real-time collection, analysis, and alerting on network infrastructure events are crucial in promptly mitigating threats.

Inadequate log storage and retention: Not storing and keeping logs for a sufficient period can make it difficult to respond to incidents, conduct forensic analysis, and meet compliance requirements.

SERVER-SIDE REQUEST FORGERY

Web applications are at risk due to the serious vulnerability known as SSRF (Server-Side Request Forgery). It occurs when a web software permits user requests — like making URLs — but neglects to adequately limit or inspect them. As a result, attackers have an opportunity to exploit the flaw and cause problems.

An attacker must first locate a web application with a vulnerability and permission for users to manage requests in order to launch an SSRF attack. To ensure that the request is sent to the desired target, they modify the request parameters, frequently by modifying the URL. This target could be an internal or external system, such as a database server or an administrator panel, within the company. The goal of an SSRF attack is for the attacker to gain unauthorized access, extract sensitive data, perform unauthorized actions, or exploit trust relationships between systems. By redirecting the request to their desired target, they can bypass security controls and potentially execute arbitrary code on the vulnerable server.

An SSRF attack can cause severe damage. It can lead to user data being stolen, sensitive information being taken, or unauthorized access to internal resources. This can result in major financial losses, damage to the organization’s reputation, and even legal consequences.

In order to stay safe from SSRF attacks, it is essential to apply suitable input validation and sanitization mechanisms. User-controlled input should be rigorously validated by web apps, and they should make sure that requests are limited to intended targets. Whitelisting and stringent access controls can be used to stop illegal requests and lessen the impact of SSRF attacks. To safeguard against SSRF and other related threats, regular security testing and vulnerability patching are crucial.

CONCLUSION

We’ve reached the end of this article, and I hope you found it helpful in some way. While simplifying the explanations, I might have unintentionally overlooked certain important points. If you noticed any mistakes or have additional insights, please let me know. Thank you for your time, and I wish you a #happylearning, #happyhacking.
======

Aren't headings cool?
------
